(slow music)
Had you ever wondered about beginners luck,
why its so easy the first time
but gets progressively worse as we try to
repeat the task.
Professor Jonathan Schooler had become
a bit of a rockstar in the world of science
in his work concerning language and memory,
when he discovered something disturbing,
something he calls the Decline Affect,
or what we might casually call the phenomena
of beginners luck.
We spoke about it at the IONS conference in San Francisco.
Jonathan this is a little bit complex to talk about,
you're a scientist and you have been studying
this phenomena for a while.
I assume because its dogging you,
its been dogging you, the thing called the Decline Affect.
So could you give us a little bit of background,
prior to launching into the studies that the Decline Affect,
were you were noticing and why it was frustrating you?
Sure, Well, as a graduate student,
I discovered a phenomenon that I was really excited about.
Its a very simple phenomenon really.
We had individuals view videotape of a bank robbery
and then some people described it
in as much detail as possible
and others engaged in some unrelated tasks,
such as naming states and then we gave them a lineup
and the simple question was,
"Whats the effect of describing the appearance,
"of a previously seen face on people's ability
"to recognise it",
and you might think that this would be helpful,
its after all verbal rehearsal but interestingly
we found that describing a face actually interfered
with people's later ability to recognise it
and this basic effect I was able to replicate
a number of times and this was my dissertation
and I got published in a good journal
and I was really excited.
I thought this is just going to be a cake walk,
lets do this again and agian,
all sorts of different ways and I was able to get the effect
subsequently but never to the same degree
and in fact the more times I tried to get it
the smaller the affect was and so here it was
this really exciting affect and I just sort of watched it
gradually shrink down.
Yeah and so that brought about
another question that you had to,
I guess you couldn't be satisfied with
continuing then until you answered the next question
and you've been trying to answer that question
for how long now?
Well I actually, after that I like first just sort of
ignored it a little bit and I thought
well I will just try other areas
and so I tried it in colour and I tried it
with taste, all sorts of different things were
people describe it and then look at the effect
of describing versus not and in each one of these cases
when I first tried a new domain it would work
great and then that would go away
and it was on of these hard things to really sort of
come to terms with the fact that somehow
everything I was trying was working
and then and then not working but eventually
I started becoming interested in that fact.
In the fact that there was something weird going on here
with the effects that I were getting were going down.
And its very predictable
when you showed your graphs yesterday,
this is pretty much a constant throughout
all of these different studies you were running.
Thats right. I saw the same sort of pattern
in a number of different studies
and then I started looking into
really different areas and at the same time that I
did that I found out that some of these areas
also had observed this same Decline Affect that a dog made.
And this is interesting.
We're going to some really practical, recognisable
areas that this also applies to
and I think for most people watching this
and certainly for myself, the whole thing about
beginner's luck and I, I mean I know what
my own perceptions are about it.
Just kind of watching what happened to
my body, my emotions and my mind
during this process of decline
and that would have to do with most things.
I mean certainly most sports for example,
dancing, I could always do things pretty well
right off the bat, sometimes really really well,
the first time out and so you have sort of an
attitude toward that or a concept of
what your abilities are based on that
and then you try it again and it doesn't go
quite as well and then I noticed a cascade
of affects going on through my body, my mind
and my emotions which now we are talking consciousness.
Right? So lets talk about that area of,
what are some of the,
as you have studied, what have you ruled out
and what is still very much open to question
Well.
Cause this is a science and consciousness
type of conference.
Sure. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I wish I could say
that I ruled out more, I think that although researchers
have observed of the Decline Affect, in across a number
of different domains, there really hasn't been
a targeted effort to try to understand and
in particularly across domains and so really
what we have much more of is a whole variety
of different things that it could be
and much less of specifically it can't be this,
or it can't be that, so unfortunately,
we just don't know what can be ruled out.
Theres only one thing that I think can be ruled out
and thats ignoring it
Yeah.
I think that thats the one thing that
has been happening where people just sort of pretend
its not there and I think that can be ruled out
but less than that, I think we have to really
just face up to the fact that theres this
really peculiar phenomenon going on,
where affect sizes seem to get smaller
when you replicate the studies.
And didn't you do
a conventional look at it, in terms of
knocking out some of the obvious testing factors
and so forth
Sure
So you are finding that by and large
those didn't seem to be what was
Well I wouldn't say that.
What i would say is that no single one of those
explanations alone is sufficient to explain this.
So I'm not ready yet to necessarily state that
it requires an unconventional account,
but what I can say is that theres no
single explanation, no single conventional explanation
that seems to be sufficient to explain it
and I can tell you about some of those.
Okay, lets talk about some of the
because of the nature of the audience
Sure
some of the potential subtle affects
like say for me, what I was just handling there.
Sure
So first of all theres attachment to outcome,
then you don't get your attachment to outcome
and there can come frustration,
there can even come fear of failure at some point.
Obvious things start happening which,
looking at the experiments we were doing yesterday
and some of Dean Raiden's also
Sure
has to be affecting this,
I mean you would think it has to be
these feelings and the morphogenic field,
whatever you want to call it,
I think you had dinner with Rupert.
I did, yeah.
And chatted with him yesterday,
I was wondering, I would love to been a fly on the wall
and see how this was all weaving together between all of you
but how just going in that wild realm would you perceive it
having been involved with this for so long.
Sure, so and again I,
I come from a perspective where I
am not quite as able to just jump on the band wagon
and necessarily embrace these perspectives
and I have to sort of throw that caveat out there
Yes.
But when I put that hat on
and I sort of go with my gut about
what it feels like is going on,
are there two sort of general kinds of things,
that seem like they may be going on here.
One is that when you first do a study,
you are so excited about the idea that
theres sort of a, everything is open and it just
really feels promising and you do it
and it works exactly the way you had hoped
and so theres just sort of a fulfilment of that expectation
and then you do it a few more times,
you get a little bit more complacent,
you start to sort of take it for granted
and something about that sort of,
now taking it for granted, you sort of
habituated to it, its not quite as exciting as it was before
and perhaps this, the enthusiasm that the experimenter
is having is somehow translating into the
way in which the affect is actually manifesting itself,
that there is some sort of para-psychological manner,
in which the experimenter is influencing the outcome.
It certainly feels that way.
That would make sense from
your point of view, its repetition of anything.
Thats right, its like, I coined the term
cosmic habituation, somehow when you're just
do it again the universe and you sort of
can jointly get bored.
When I talked to Rupert Cheldrik about this,
he also suggested that what was happening is
you put the idea out there and other people go,
"Hmmm that doesn't sound right"
and so theres a skepticism among others
and it maybe that somehow the skepticism
among others perhaps even influencing you as well,
has this sort of affect of dampening the power,
the fact, so he was suggesting, to actually do a study
where you increase the skepticism about a phenomenon
and then examine whether that facilitates
or speeds up the Decline Affect.
Yeah that would certainly make sense.
When you were talking a moment ago
about this cosmic habituation or cosmic boredom,
I'm looking at that now and it brings up bubbles,
all kinds of questions bubble up
because this has a very practical implication
in our lives across the board.
With our, many of us have the inability
to sustain a really energised interest in anything
for a long period of time and maybe that even
goes against the grain of the cosmic functioning.
Is there something about new and impulsive
and refreshing that is native to life perhaps?
Thats in this equation.
Well, I thinks thats the kind of thing that
I find myself, at least on some days,
leaning towards, I think there maybe someway in which
beginners luck is somehow just in the fabric of
the cosmos, that if we set off in some sort of promising
direction, that when we first try something new
and its promising, somehow the universe affords
opportunities that may not be there subsequently
and I have to say I found myself,
my decisions influenced under these circumstances.
So, for example, lot of times if you
see an opportunity, you move to a new town
and you see a house and you, it just seems spectacular
you think "Oh, this would be too impulsive
"to buy this right away, surely there will be lots of other,
"you know just as good"
and I have to tell you, the last house I bought,
I looked at a few houses but it was like the third house
and I was like "No, I don't believe that,
"I don't believe that its just gonna be, you know
"one of many many others that I'll see"
It felt like this was another one of these examples
of the first time, beginners luck and I was,
I bought the house, you know
and I was influenced by
You didn't do a study?
I didn't do a study and it was a big decision
and admittedly the market went down
but this still was the most spectacular house
and I have never once regretted that decision
and I think that being aware of that fact,
being aware that these are the possibility
that when you first encounter a new situation,
there maybe opportunities there that you just can't
count on repeating themselves and that may just be
sort of the way life is, that somebody keep in mind
and its certainly consistent with this research.
We absolutely and that to me where it
gets really juicy because we all know,
we've all felt it and its almost as though
theres an imperative on a cosmic scale
that we continue to move forward,
grow, be open to change, whatever you want to call it,
it seems thats a nature of life.
Yeah, theres something about first experiences
that seem fundamentally profound that we should be looking
for these first experiences in different situations
and we need to really appreciate the oppurtunities
that those first experiences may provide
and recognise that these maybe really unique.
And yet at the same time,
you know, part of me is hearing you saying,
yeah but then aren't we just kind of adrenaline junkies,
this is very different then being an adrenaline junkie
and this, the distinction should be made at this point,
just looking for new input, new everything,
consuming, using and exploiting for the sake of getting
a rush, an adrenaline rush, an ego rush,
thats not what we are talking about here.
Well, I mean, the key thing here is that
when one finds oneself in these circumstances,
that you can expect certain kinds of oppurtunities
potentially present themselves but that doesn't mean
that one wants to just go willy nilly,
that there has to be constraints on the kinds of
new experience ones going to look for
and one might well also expect if one
goes in sort of dangerous directions that there could be
really disturbing, you know, you could have things going
extra bad and that will sort of set you,
I've had probably some of those experience too,
I've done something a little marginal
and it well really really bad and
I was like, "Oh, Okay, I get it"
Thats right, so it kind of straightens you out both ways.
When I take this sort of spiritual perspective
on these kinds of phenomenon and imagine
what they might mean and again I have to
put on my scientific hat for a second and still say
only some of the time am I able to do that.
But when I do that it feels like when one is going in a
good direction and they try something new
that the universe really opens up
but if you go in a dangerous direction
its going to be exactly the opposite.
It seems as if its in directions that are
sort of promising so there does seem to be something
to this verbal over shadowing affect,
its just nowhere near as big as when I first discovered it.
The universe was like, "Yeah, go in this direction"
but just recognise that its not going to be
this easy all the way through.
The alchemist, the beautiful allegorical tale
has this as one of its central themes,
where the boy goes in an important direction
and at first gets some really really positive oppurtunities
and sort of says "Yes" you know "Go after it, do this"
but then runs into lot of difficulties so it somehow,
when you're going in a good direction,
you get sort of this opening up intitally
but you can't count on it carrying on that way
and in fact what that means is that
you probably want to continue going in that way
and not necessarily just try another way and
another way and another way and I think theres,
if one pursues this sort of perspective
that this might suggest, it says that when you get something
that opens up in a promising way, that tells you
its a good direction to go in but don't count on it
being as easy from there on in.
Yes its almost as though its a, an invitation
Yes.
Theres a little voice, theres your invite,
just like when you bought your house,
thats your, you loved that house and thats how I buy
all my life I bought houses like that and it will
seem crazy, people say, "Aren't you going to look around
"a little more",
but something in me will just say,
you know, I heard about this place,
I just have to take a peek and I have a physiological
response to that, every time its very cosistent
and I've never gone wrong.
I've always loved the places that I have either bought
or in times passed, rented even.
That first impulse, but you are right.
Just because you go in there doesn't mean
things aren't going to breakdown,
you are not going to have to make repairs
Right, Right.
But you're in the right place,
you're on the right road, the right path.
Lets extend this Decline Affect out to a couple of other
areas that I thought were interesting
because, in my mind I was perceiving it in a certain way
but I want to know how you're perceiving it
and that is, when we are looking at drug treatments even.
Studies have been done where certain drugs,
and these are classes of drugs that are pretty common.
We have cholesterol, beta blocker, glaucoma
and even anti psychotic drugs,
we don't need to name brands but in each of these cases
this Decline affect has also taken place,
even on a physiological level.
Whats up with that?
Well again its important not to dismiss
the more conventional kinds of explanations
so I can't emphasise enough that well,
I personally am open to an idea that
there really is some sort of energy thing going on here
and certain affordances that the universe provides,
that there maybe also some very basic kinds of
conventional things so one possibility is that
when researchers first do studies they just get lucky,
they just you know, you don't bring a drug to market unless
you've gotten some very promising thing so when they
first do the study theres an exaggeration in its affect size
just due to random chance and so when you run the studies
again, the replications, they're just are not as good
because in effect you got lucky the first time.
Yeah, what about the potential of even,
I mean we've heard about this from some of the very very
you know, the largest drug manufacturers,
that theres even sometimes corrupted studies to begin with,
so have to allow for corrupted studies,
where there is a little benefit in there
for having a certain finding.
So lets rule that out right off
because we know that does exist.
But you're saying where theres been legitimate
research done.
Right legitimate research and they did everything
right or reasonably right but just sometime
you're gonna get, you're always gonna get some random
noise that also is associated with whatever
your two conditions are, theres always random noise in
studies that involve drugs or anything of that sort
and that noise can work either for you
or against you and in sometimes its gonna work
in the favour of a difference between the drug
and the placebo and thats going to create an exaggeration.
Another possibility is changes in people's expectations.
People may have either increased belief in the drug,
or a decrease belief in the drug,
they may have heard about other people who had
good affects or bad affects of it and now its gonna
then change the belief set of people who are taking it
and they are not going to be as naive about it
and so changes in actually understanding about
what the drug may or may not do could change its overall
efficacy and the difference between it and the placebo.
Yeah that makes sense.
It also, this is just kind of on a, again a biological
feeling level, when we first take a drug its normally
the stimulate the body into an opposite reaction
and it would seems over time the body may just become
habituated or even inresonance energetically with the drug
to the extent that its just part of the normal fabric,
its not shocking the system into the effect anymore.
Well and that would certainly be the case for when you
see declines in individuals response to the drug.
A lot of these studies are with different populations
and thats on the things that make it so interesting,
its just that, theres one group and then
you do it with a different group
and that group is not showing the same response
as the first group did and then the third group
is showing even a lesser response,
so its actually across populations you see this,
Decline Affect which makes it that much more remarkable
because its harder to explain and then yeah,
after a while people are just getting used to whatever
the drug is
Another area is medical intervention.
Yeah
So maybe you could talk about that
a little bit, what was noticed there?
Well, in this study what was done is,
they looked at most cited intervention studies
that the drugs as well as other types of interventions
and they looked to see to what percentage of that
replicated and 40% of the most cited studies
either were contra-indicated, that is,
whatever it was actually worked in reverse,
it was non-effective or less effective than the
initial reported study.
40%, so its a really dramatic proportion are showing
something that would be very akin to what
I'm calling the Decline Affect.
And then the third one that you were talking
about yesterday is even meta analysis
in the world of biology.
Yeah. And you might think that if you were just
looking at, you know, animals were theres no expectation,
you would think that you would just be very consistent
affects but what this study did was to look at the
relationship between variables, you know,
number of different biological studies
and what a meta analysis is already looking at a
number of different studies, so this was actually a
meta analysis of meta analysis, so hundred
and hundred of studies were included in this analysis
and basically what happened was is that,
all the findings that were reported in subsequent years,
were smaller than they were in the initial reports
and again this gradual Decline, so you know,
just very striking the same thing that I have seen
in my lab in a number of different domains
has also been observed in all these other areas.
Now theres certain other areas that don't seem to see it.
We don't see in physics, as far as I know,
there maybe some exceptions but you know,
ball still roll down inclines the same rate that they did
when Galileo was doing it, so theres some things
that stay constant but in a whole variety of different
domains we see this peculiar shrinkage
in the magnitude of affect.
Now does this work in your
presenting with Dean Raiden, also with Derrel
who is doing the physic experiments
which the crowd participated in,
which was quite interesting,
in the experiments that preceded your presentation
yesterday, you had people staring at a screen
that had two little boxes on it
and you had to allow yourself to very naturally be
drawn to the box you thought that the image was going
to appear in, you had right or left that was it,
and it was Dean Raiden's work were observation
affects outcomes.
Now in the Decline Affect how does all of this
potentially blend together.
Well one prediction that it makes is a
slightly disheartening one, which is that when
other researchers or even when they set out
to try to replicate these studies,
that they are going to have a harder time of it,
that its going to be less possible to get the effect
as they observed so strongly in their initial studies
and the intriguing interpretation is that it doesn't mean
that their studies were wrong initially but that somehow
they were subject to this Decline Affect so that
real affects just dwindle in magnitude with time
and this of course is very difficult to sell
when you tell a skeptic, "Oh well the reason you can't
"replicate my study is because its time
"but it was really there"
you know thats a tough sell but on the other hand
we don't really understand whats
going on with the Decline Affect
and so to dismiss that as an account is really
not appropriate either.
The really interesting thing is that what,
for example, Dean Raiden, he never totally
replicates his study, he is always trying different things
and Derrel Bem, what he did was not to mime at
same experiments mime conceptually related experiments
but each one somewhat different and so what people really
I think need to do is to go out and try variations
on these experiments and see if they can get
those to work and so the discouraging prediction
is that if you try to do a perfect replication,
its not going to work so well but if you do
a conceptual replication, a variation on it, thats novel,
that that should produce very powerful effects initially
and I hope that open minded people will go out there
and try something new for themselves
which is what I did, we tried a variation
on Derell's paradigm and we got a very powerful affect.
It did Decline but we got a really good affect
and then watched it gradually go away too.
Well yesterday I think you got a
pretty positive one, certainly well more,
well over half the people in the room
got over half of the images correct
and thats kind of what they're looking for,
as what 53% right in there that 3% differential
is actually significant when you're studying in
para-psychology fields of consciousness.
But he did say that that was the first time
that he'd ever tried that, this study in this kind of
context in a group context so I would predict,
that if he were to try to do that same demonstration
version of the study to a new group
its not gonna work as well,
so I would say what he got was the first hit
of a new version of his paradigm that worked really well,
now hes gonna go do it again thinking,
"Wow, this really works well"
and next time you're not gonna see so many hands go up.
That would be my prediction.
I should find out,
aren't you guys doing this in a
Thats right yeah, come back
Doing this in another hour
Come back, we got a prediction, you watch
I think there should be decline in
Theres gonna be a decline
Now I know this kind of free association
here but does Dean Raiden's work were the affect
of the observer on the outcome have anything.
Do you think that might be tied into this?
Again, when I put all my open minded,
when I put my open minded hat on,
I and I should say I do wear my open minded hat in public
so I mentioned this in a commentary that wrote In Nature
which is the sort of the premiere mainstream journal
and I mentioned the possibility that one interpretation
of the Decline Affect is very akin to the
Hizenburg uncertainty, where the active observation,
in this case the active scientific observation
of a phenomenon might somehow change the
phenomenon itself.
Now this is a, if you really think through
what I'm saying here, its a really radical idea.
Absolutely
Because what its suggesting is that
again tentatively, just as one possible variety,
out of a set of possibilities, its suggesting that
the act of observing phenomenon might actually
change the rules of nature in some way.
That the rules of nature may not be immutable
as is always assumed and that through
the process of observation we may actually shape
and change whats actually going on.
Which I find fascinating
and then this is where we morph over
into Rupert Cheldrik's morphogenic field work
because as he talks about in various simple
and often replicate it, I will be curious to know about his
Decline Affect in his studies.
The notion of a person watching the back of another
head to observe or look at or focus your attention
on the back of someone else's head
specifically more often then not, a personal
react and turn around, I watched that on the street today,
as a matter of fact, just thinking about it
and its amazing, you can just glance at someone
its amazing how often the other person is being glanced at
from behind or automatically just turns to the ground,
theres something that appears to be very powerful
about the focussed consciousness that seems to come from
observation, very powerful
Yeah, the funny thing about that phenomenon
is that we even kind of know what it feels like,
this sort of a feeling on the back of your neck,
that we think we experience when someone's
looking at us and the research on that is really
pretty compelling.
Rupert tells me that hes not seen a Decline Affect
with that particular paradigm which I find interesting
but he has seen Decline Affects with some other paradigms
and his accounting of it is that,
when he has paradigms in which there is say
one right answer and a number of wrong answers
that what happens is that people get discouraged
and its the discouraged experience that leads to the
Decline Affect and so hes now changed his paradigms
to have a one right and one wrong to increase the
proportion of time that induviduals can be right
and with the speculation that that would lead to
a smaller Decline affect in his paradigms.
That makes sense and thats that more
reflex the little experiment done yesterday,
they have the right or the left,
you know, choose now, boom boom, you have to choose
and that makes sense and thats exactly when we first
started talking what I was feeling about this
beginners luck and the Decline Affect,
is there is this feeling that happens naturally
over being discouraged, thats very the emotional field
that has to have a very powerful affect on the larger field.
It certainly might, I think thats an interesting
accounting, I still also think that theres a possibility
that there maybe some sort of inverse to this
morphogenic field idea where he argues that
when sort of things get on to the
global consciousness stage, the affects get larger
and there maybe some other way, some inverse of that
where under some circumstances,
when things get on that stage affects get
smaller, that the Decline Affect maybe some
peculiar inverse of morphogenic field type
of phenomenon that we just sort of need to
better understand when the one kind of situation applies
and when the other applies and
the many situations in which neither may apply.
I find all of it fascinating and
I don't find it intimidating at all.
Makes sense to me because on some visceral level
I can also feel it and see the energy moving in that way.
Any final thoughts on this as far as what you're finding
exciting about, what maybe bumping into here in the future?
Well I think that what this calls for
is a mixture of two, what might seem to be
really really different instincts.
One instinct is for open mindedness
and to really sort of embrace some of the radical
ideas that we've been talking about here
but the other instinct which is often times
treated as really being the opposite of that,
but I think go hand in hand is to be very very rigourous
and in fact to insist that science show a level of rigour
across domains that it doesn't currently show.
Let me explain what I mean by that.
Currently the only scientific findings that
are made available to the public record
are those that go through this very
convoluted publication process.
Lots of data, lots of results, lots of conditions
never make it into the public record.
And thats the way scientific method is done
and what this means is that we don't know
when we have a published result,
we don't know how that fits into the larger body
of collected data, so its very hard to know
how these big initial affects,
how many studies didn't work?
Yeah, prominent it is, yeah.
How many? We just don't know,
so what we really need to do is,
we don't know when researchers did it
what are the things did they try or not try.
What I think we need to do is change how
science is done to basically how scientists log
ahead of time, what it is that they are planning to do
in some open source database and then after they collect
the data, after they've gone through the publication process
theres been an appropriate period to get the work published,
no matter what, its made available,
so that we have a more transparency in the scientific
process and I think its only by introducing that level of
transparency that we will be really be able to understand
the nature of the Decline Affect
and what I think may happen is that when we introduce
this greater level of transparency, we may see that a lot of
the conventional explanations which at present
still need seriously kept on the table,
are insufficient and that it maybe that actually
through greater rigour that we may come to
appreciate some of the more subtle energy processes
that could be involved.
That makes total sense
and besides that it sounds more,
almost more democratic and more representative
in terms of results.
Its not just a certain elite name or two that
are published and thats the end of the story.
That may, what you say makes a lot of sense.
Its very inviting.
And I think its doable and that it would have to,
you still have to have rigour and you would have to
make sure that theres documentation of
how the study was done so it wouldn't mean
that you could just sort of willy nilly report
anything but it would provide a way of
introducing a level of transparency to the scientific
process thats not currently available
and who knows what remarkable aspects
about nature we might discover as a result.
Thank you so much
Its my pleasure
For more on this kind of
unified field related topic, you might also enjoy
our interviews with Dean Raiden and Tom Campbell.
Until next time thanks for watching CMN.
(fading music)